# Change Log

## [Unreleased]

### Added

#### Language 

- Added the [index syntax](./Document.md#index-syntax), `Indexable` trait and `Indexable` namespace in `Std` module.

#### Std

- Implement `Array a : Indexable`, `String : Indexable`.
- Added the `Identity` and `Const` types in `Std`. They are functors, and `Identity` is also a monad.
- Add `Std::ToX` traits for all primitive numeric types and C types (e.g., `Std::ToI32`, `Std::ToCUnsignedInt`, etc.). Each trait has a method to cast a value into the target type. The conversion functions are named in lower snake case, such as `i32` and `c_unsigned_int`. They do not have prefixes like `to_`.

#### Compiler 

- Added `--backtrace` option to `build`, `run`, `test` commands to enable printing backtrace when a runtime error occurs.
- Added `backtrace` field to `build` and `build.test` section of `fixproj.toml` file.
- Added `--no-runtime-check` option to `build`, `run` commands to disable runtime checks (e.g., out-of-range check for array access).
- Added `no_runtime_check` field to `build` section of `fixproj.toml` file.
- Added `--disable-cpu-feature <feature>` option to `build`, `run`, `test` commands to disable specific CPU features. Add `disable_cpu_features` field to `build` and `build.test` section of `fixproj.toml` file.
- Added `unwrap-newtype` optimization, which removes unnecessary newtype wrappers, e.g., `type Foo = unbox struct { data : Bar }`.
- Added `inline-local` optimization, which tries to inline local functions.

#### Tool

- Edit: Added `fix edit explicit-import` command to rewrite import statements to explicitly import only the necessary entities.
- LSP: Added a feature to automatically add import statements when completing entity names, if necessary.
- LSP: Added Quick Fix for "Unknown name" and "Unknown type" errors to add import statements.
- LSP: You can now show documents and jump to definitions from entities written in import statements.

### Changed

#### Language

- Type variables used in trait member definitions can no longer be used in implementations of those trait members. For example, for `trait [f:*->*] f : Functor { map : (a -> b) -> f a -> f b; }`, you cannot use `a`, `b` in `impl MyType : Functor { map = |f : a -> b, x : MyType a| ...}`. This change ensures that renaming type variables in trait definitions does not affect implementations of trait members. Instead, you can introduce type variables in type signatures of trait members. For example, you can write `impl MyType : Functor { map : (a -> b) -> MyType a -> MyType b = |f : a -> b, x : MyType a| ...}`. 
- You can now refer to entities using absolute namespace syntax (e.g., `::Std::String`) without importing them.

#### Std

- Change type of `Std::FFI::boxed_from_retained_ptr` from `Ptr -> a` to `Ptr -> IO a`. Change type of `Std::FFI::boxed_to_retained_ptr` from `a -> Ptr` to `a -> IO Ptr`.
- Changed the type of `Std::FFI::Destructor::make` function to return `IO`. Correspondingly, `Std::IO::IOHandle::from_file_ptr` also returns `IO`.
- Made all values in the `Std::PunchedArray` namespace private (since they are not intended to be used directly from outside).
- `Array::empty` and `Array::fill` now verifies the capacity and size arguments at runtime to ensure they are non-negative, and raises an error if they are negative.

#### Compiler

- When an out-of-range array access occurs, the error message now includes the index that was accessed and the size of the array.
- When `undefined` is reached, a newline is now added after the user-specified message.
- Changed the condition for inlining optimization. A function will be inlined if its complexity is below a certain threshold, regardless of the number of times it is called.

### Fixed

- LSP: Fixed an issue where documents were not displayed when hovering over type aliases and trait aliases.
- Docs: Fixed an issue where trait aliases were not displayed in the documentation generated by `fix docs`.
- Fixed an issue where `close_file` was not called if the `action` passed to `with_file` function returned an error.
- Fix #64, #65, #69, #70, #71, #72.

## [1.1.0] - 2025-09-04

### Added

- Add `fix_version` field to `fixproj.toml` file. You can specify the version of Fix necessary to compile your project.
- Add `Std::String::unsafe_from_c_str_ptr : Ptr -> String` function.
- Implement `String : FromBytes` and `String : ToBytes`. You can convert a string to a (null-terminated) byte array and vice versa.
- Add `Std::Array::search_partition_point`.
- Add new optimization ("optimization/decapturing.rs"). This will be applied when the optimization level is `max`.
- Add `bit_not` functions to each integer types.
- Add `Std::IO::input_line_s : IO String` function, which reads a line from stdin and strips the last newline characters.
- Add `Std::Iterator::check_all : [it : Iterator, Item it = a] (a -> Bool) -> it -> Bool` and `Std::Iterator::check_any : [it : Iterator, Item it = a] (a -> Bool) -> it -> Bool`.
- Add `Std::Iterator::loop_iter_s` and `Std::Iterator::loop_iter_ms`, which are similar to `Std::Iterator::loop_iter` and `Std::Iterator::loop_iter_m`, but they return a `LoopState` and allow the caller to know whether the loop ended with `break(_m)` or `continue(_m)`.
- Add `Std::IO::flush : IOHandle -> IO I32` to flush an `IOHandle`.
- Add `fix version` command.
- Add `populate : Array String -> String -> String` to populate strings into a template string, similar to "format" function in other languages, but you need to stringify values by yourself.
- Improve `Std::Array::sort_by` implementation (now it uses introsort), and added `Std::Array::sort_stable_by` function (currently implemented by merge sort).
- Add `Std::Array::resize` to resize an array to a given length, filling the new elements with a given value, or truncating the array if the new length is smaller than the current length.
- Add `Std::Array::reverse` to reverse an array.
- Add `Std::Iterator::enumerate`.
- Add `Std::Array::sort : [a : LessThan] Array a -> Array a` and `Std::Array::sort_stable : [a : LessThan] Array a -> Array a`;
- Add `Std::Array::dedup : [a : Eq] Array a -> Array a` which removes consecutive duplicate elements from the array.
- Add support for `textDocument/documentSymbol` request in the language server.

### Changed

- Update LLVM to 17.0.x.
- Improve language server protocol support.
- By creating a "# Parameters" section within a function's documentation comment and listing its arguments, the Language Server now inserts argument placeholders after autocompletion. For details, please refer to the [explanation in the documents](/Document.md#specifying-parameter-list-in-the-documentation-comment-as-a-hint-to-the-language-server).
- Now `fix docs` command skips generating document for private values (i.e., values whose names start with an underscore). If you want to generate document for them, use `--with-private` option.
- Now `fix init` command generates a sample "main.fix" file and a sample "test.fix" file in the current directory.
- Now output is not colored when stderr is not a TTY.
- Now `Std::Iterator::range` returns an empty iterator when `start > end`.
- Now `Std::Iterator::range_step` returns an empty iterator when `step * (start - end) > 0` and aborts when `step == 0`.
- Previously, the Fix standard library used `fdopen` for `Std::IO::stdin, stdout, stderr`, but it now uses the ones opened by the C runtime library.
- Changed range checking for hexadecimal and binary integer literals so that such literals can represent negative values when appropriate; for example, `0xffffffffffffffff` previously exceeded the maximum of a 64-bit signed integer and produced an error, but after this fix it is interpreted as `-1`.

### Fixed

- Fix the issue that the format of the markdown file generated by `fix docs` is broken when using markdown header lines in documentation comments.
- Fix the issue that the compiler crashes when using NBSP (U+00A0) in the source code.
- Fix the issue that the parser takes too long to parse some code (#57).
- Fix the issue that the code `let x= 42; {...}` could not be parsed (since the parser expected a space between `x` and `=`).
- Fix the issue that compiling some code causes a compiler crash (#59).
- Fix the issue that `FFI_CALL[() f(CLongLong)]` (or some of other similar expressions) could not be parsed (#62).

## [1.0.1] - 2025-02-26

### Added

- Rebuild prebuilt binaries (attached to this release). x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu is built on ubuntu-20.04, x86_64-apple-darwin is built on macos-13, aarch64-apple-darwin is built on macos-14.

### Changed

- Update the version of the Fix project "std-doc" for generating the document of the standard library to 1.0.0 to match the version of the compiler.

## [1.0.0] - 2025-02-22

### Added

- Add `Std::Monad::unless : [m : Monad] Bool -> m () -> m ()`, `Std::Monad::when : [m : Monad] Bool -> m () -> m ()`.
- Add type aliases `Std::FFI::CChar`, `Std::FFI::CUnsignedChar`, `Std::FFI::CShort`, `Std::FFI::CUnsignedShort`, `Std::FFI::CInt`, `Std::FFI::CUnsignedInt`, `Std::FFI::CLong`, `Std::FFI::CUnsignedLong`, `Std::FFI::CLongLong`, `Std::FFI::CUnsignedLongLong`, `Std::FFI::CSizeT`, `Std::FFI::CFloat`, `Std::FFI::CDouble`.
- Add `Std::FFI::_get_boxed_ptr`, `Std::FFI::borrow_boxed`.
- Add `Std::FFI::get_errno`, `Std::FFI::clear_errno`.
- Add `act_{field} : [f : Functor] (F -> f F) -> S -> f S` for each field `{field}` of type `F` of a struct `S`, which is known as "Lens" in Haskell community.
- Add `Std::Destructor::mutate_unique` and `Std::Destructor::mutate_unique_io`.
- Implement `Functor` for tuple types. `map` function acts the last component of tuples.
- Add `FFI_EXPORT` syntax. Remove `fixruntime_run_function` native function since it can be implemented using `FFI_EXPORT`.
- Add experimental support for language server protocol.
- Add support for project file ("fixproj.toml").
- Add support for configuration file ("~/.fixconfig.toml").
- Add `fix deps` subccommand, which manages dependencies of a Fix project.
- Add `fix docs` subcommand, which generates the document for a Fix project.
- Add `fix test` subcommand, which runs `Test::test`.
- Add `-O (--object)` option to specify object files to be linked.
- Add `fix init` subcommand, which generates a template project file.
- Add `FFI_CALL_IO` and `FFI_CALL_IOS` syntax, which is similar to `FFI_CALL` but suitable for foregin functions which have side effects.
- Add `Std::with_retained`.
- Add `{monad_expr};; {expr}` syntax, which is equivalent to `let _ = *{monad_expr}; {expr}`.
- Add `Std::Box::make` function.
- Support building dynamic libraries (use `--output-type dylib`).
- Add `match` syntax.
- Change the bit width of reference counter from 64 to 32.
- Add `Std::Arrow`, which is a higher-kinded type for functions.
- Add absolute namespace syntax: you can `::Main::X` instead of `Main::X` to refer to `X` in the top level namespace of the `Main` module.
- Implement `Zero` for `Array a`, `Iterator a`, `String`. Implement `Add` for `String`, `Array a`.
 
### Changed

- Change namespace of `type Destructor` from `Std::FFI::Destructor` to `Std::FFI`.
- Swap return values of `generate_*` functions in `Random` module, e.g., changed `generate_U64 : Random -> (U64, Random)` to `generate_U64 : Random -> (Random, U64)`.
- Remove functions to modify arrays or structs asserting uniqueness: `set_{field}!`, `mod_{field}!`, `Array::set!`, `Array::mod!`, `Array::act!`, `Array::append!`, `Array::push_back!`, `Array::pop_back!`. If you want to assert a value is unique, use `Debug::assert_unique` instead.
- Rename `Debug::assert_unique!` to `Debug::assert_unique`.
- Rename `Std::PunchedArray::plug_in!` and `Std::PunchedArray::punch!` to `Std::PunchedArray::plug_in` and `Std::PunchedArray::unsafe_punch` respectively.
- Allow making empty structs.
- Forbid underscores in type names, trait names, module names and namespaces.
- Change `CALL_C` to `FFI_CALL`.
- Remove `Std::abort` and added `Std::undefined : String -> a`.
- Change the type of arguments of `Std::FFI::get_funptr_retain` and `Std::FFI::get_funptr_release`.
- Remove `Debug` built-in module, which is moved into `Std::Debug` namespace.
- Remove `AsyncTask`, `Character`, `Hash`, `HashMap`, `HashSet`, `Math`, `Random`, `RegExp`, `Subprocess` and `Time` built-in modules. They are provided as independent Fix projects.
- Change the type of `Debug::assert` and `Debug::assert_eq`. Now they return `IO ()`.
- Change the internal representation of `IO a` types. Now `IO a` is isomorphic to `IOState -> (IOState, a)`.
- Remove `IO::from_func` and added `IO::from_runner : (IOState -> (IOState, a)) -> IO a`.
- Change `force_unique` to `_unsafe_force_unique`.
- Change the semantics of the "eval" syntax. See the document for details.
- Rename `Std::Boxed` type to `Std::Box`. 
- Rename `Std::LoopResult` type to `Std::LoopState`.
- Allow trait implementations to be placed in any namespace. Previously, they could only be written at the top level of a module. However, it does not matter in which namespace you define them.
- Rename optimization lavels from `none`, `separated`, `default` to `none`, `basic`, `max`.

### Fixed

- Fix an issue on `Std::Array::act` which may cause memory leak.
- Fix #45, #46, #47, #49.
- Disallow `...` in argument types list in `CALL_C` (`FFI_CALL`) because there is no way to handle variadic arguments in Fix.

## [0.2.0] - 2024-06-12

### Added

- Experimental support for multi-threading. Added `AsyncTask` built-in module.
- Add associated types.
- Add functions related to command line arguments: `get_arg`, `get_arg_count`, `get_args` in `Std::IO`.
- Add `Random` built-in module.
- Add `Std::F32::infinity`, `Std::F64::infinity`, `Std::F32::quiet_nan`, `Std::F64::quiet_nan`.
- Add `Std::FFI` namespace which includes functions which are used to share ownership of Fix's boxed object with C program via FFI. Move `Destructor` and associated functions into `Std::FFI`.
- Add hexadecimal, octal, binary integer literal (`0xaBC`, `0o123` or `0b110`) (#24).
- Add `RegExp` module (written by [pt9999](https://github.com/pt9999)).
- `Option a`, `Result e a` and tuples now implements `Eq` when type parameters of each type is satisfying preconditions.
- `Array a`, `Option a`, `Result e a`, `()` and tuples now implements `ToString` when type parameters of each type is satisfying preconditions.
- `Array a`, `String` and tuples now implements `LessThan` and `LessThanOrEq` when type parameters of each type is satisfying preconditions.
- Add orphan rule: a module cannot implement an external trait for an external type.
- The "eval" syntax now accepts only an expression of type `()`.
- Add `Std::Functor::forget : [f : Functor] f a -> f ()`, [which is intended to be used with "eval".](/Document.md#chaining-io-actions-by-eval-and-forget)
- Tuple of size 1, e.g., `(I64,)` (type of 1-tuples whose element is `I64`), `(42,)` (literal for 1-tuple) or `let (x,) = (42,);` (pattern matching for 1-tuple).
- Add `Std::Iterator::product : Iterator a -> Iterator b -> Iterator (b, a)`.

### Changed

- Overflowing integer literals now result in a compile-time error.
- Now tuple types (`Std::Tuple{N}`) for any large N are defined if they are used. In older versions, only tuples upto N=4 were defined.
- Module names can contain period so that you can define a module such as `Main.Model.Impl`.
- Now, in a trait definition, the type of a trait method should contain the type variable of that trait definition.
- Allow extra comma in many place. For example, you can write `[1, 2, 3, ]` for array literal of length 3.
- Type name, trait name, module name and namespace name can now starts with an underscore preceeding a capital letter.

### Fixed

- Performance improvement of functions in built-in libraries: #6, #30, #31
- Bug fixes on built-in libraries: #11, #13, #27, #34
- Bug fixes on compiler: #8, #14, #15, #20, #25, #26, #28, #36, #42, #43

## [0.1.0] - 2023-10-24

### Added

- First release in initial development phase including almost all features planned from the beginning.